"Every road," what's called? "Every road leads to the wrong path." Same way, every teaching leads
to the Dzogchen, and Dzogchen is beyond the conception.
So, but every kind of code, the blues of each of those yanas, with the conception, won't get
enlightenment, with the conception, enlightenment.
For example, after opening, looking from Dzockebu, Dzockebu, every yana, every kind of look,
looking to that, they have some errors, some weaknesses.
And in his proposal, three lower yanas, or three casual yanas, such as Sharapayana, Parthikvodayana
, Yana, these two, as known as Hinayana,
they have again some tends to hold the intangible things that exist. They didn't exactly discover
absolute great emptiness in the religion.
And that is the, in a way, the every matter, mass, things that exist in their things.
That we started in those shared attacks, that you learned that. And then, same time, they had also
a relaxation holding on the state of the, such as Ahadahod.
Ahadahod is a negation status. Holding the rules as negation status, again, in the Dzockebu point
of view, or even in Mahayana point of view, they don't have full realizations.
Negation is the full natural
And then in Mahayana, again in Dzockeg, or when we look in Dzockeg, they have also kind of little
more leanings of the emptiness, all kind of negation of the emptiness states, all like that.
And in the Kriyatatra, they are holding more characteristics, characteristics. And similarly, in
Mahay Yoga and Anu Yoga, they have also leanings of the more, more leanings of the visualization,
very regularization, holding different images, images with structuralist things. And Anu Yoga also
leanings more of the channels with, again, structural qualities. Structural qualities are
structured and structured.
According to Dzockeg point of view, that structure quality is propagated by the dualities, that won
't lead to relaxation. And what is Dzockeg, then? Dzockeg is free from structures, free from the
organizing, and also even say Dzockeg is free from the activities, free from the effort.
And that's what took you is, took you is, relaxing in the ordinary state, not doing anything. Be in
the ordinary state. For that, those reasons in Dzockeg as said, even there is no meditators, there
is no meditators.
And there is also no destructors. No meditation, no destructors. Just be in that Dzockeg status.
And everything, when you look at it from Dzockeg point of view, all of those yanas has effort, has
driving force.
That drive force and effort is not going to lead augmenting meanings. That's what point. But
however, this is the meditational level. When you have that meditating, that's what you should med
itate.
But in the mundane level, in all those teachings are important. That's what the Dzockeg teaching
always says, emphasizes on the body, for example. Even the Dzockeg teaching is self-named, named as
body teaching.
But when you come to the meditational level, then release everything. Carefree. There's nothing to
care. Relax in the natural. Total carefree. Freedom. Relax. Openness.
Not structure, not exactly, not exactly. Be in the natural state. So that's the one here, you see.
All others, others are, through that effort, we're not going to hear.
Those who are, the nayanas who are structured at the end of the nayanas journey, then you have to
join to the Dzockeg, that who is then more emphasizing on the wisdom.
Then we'll get the realization of the true natures. And until that, until you discover the self-
born eagerness, you're not going to get enlightenment, no matter whatever the yana you're using that
.
And that is, again, in the Nada Dzockeg Andhra, known as the very refined liquid of the precious
gold of the space section, space section of the Western Dandara.
Western Dandara, in that Dandara said, said, if a rupa is not diluted by the constructions, then
this dharmangaya. And rupa, natural quality of the rupa is sovavakaya, since it's not caused by the
cause and conditions.
It is uncomposed as the sky. And then, again, other Dandara, Dandara, Dzockeg Dandara, known as, is
equalized as the sky dandara.
And there, in the teaching said, as a lotus is not equipped by the mud, and similarly, the true
nature of the Western mind or the Bodhic Jata, the true absolute enlightenment mind or the Bodhic J
ata is free from the duality.
Because in that nature of the absolute wisdom has no stains. For that reason, it is self-born
essence. Essence is not propagated by anyone. It is awareness of the King.
King, it is uncombounded heart. This cannot be destroyed by any circumstances. There is nothing to
be accepted, nothing to be rejected.
If you have just discovered this realization, that yogi or yogini, even they appeared as human
beings, but their mind is Buddha. Their mind is Buddha, and their voice is the voice of the Buddha
or the voice of the Brahman.
And the Buddha of the three times is free from conceptions, and the Buddha of the three times is
free from consciousness, and it is self-born awareness.
It is the wisdom that does not come from the duality mind. And therefore, wisdom does not come from
the mind.
It is the ordinary, pristine self-awareness of the Lomistic. And therefore, this ordinary nature of
the phenomenon is the great emptiness that is ordinary nature, but does not come from the component
.
This nature of every phenomenon does not come from the phenomenon. It is natural. All phenomena
reflect from this nature.
And again, the others of the Tantra, Yihit and Dutta, in that Tantra said, this self-awareness is
originally inherited, originally recited qualities.
Again, same thing. Same thing is not born caused by the cause, is not developed or changed by the
conditions, it is not by any effort, it is dharmakai, it is awareness.
Therefore, everybody must have the confidence to discover this nature.
And then, another Tantra, Dokit Tantra, Rakhachib Tantra. I think I am going to read it, because it
is already translated there, and you can look to that.
So, I am not struggling to translate and try to translate these titles.
Titles, Rakhachib Tantra, and this great dharmakai is free from all the heads or the extremes. It
is a recited to everyone, but yet, everybody didn't recognize or realize this.
It is not the mind, it is not the conception, it is not ignorance, it is not deluded.
It is the total raka, that is free from the dualities.
It is even there, it burns many things, but nature never changed.
Everything, what you perceive, all concluded within this one single state of the nature of the mind
.
And that is what nature is.
If you understand this unchanging college of the raka, you understand everything.
And if you see this raka is free from the duality or free from the mind, you understand that every
phenomenon is free from the strains.
If you see raka has something, a company, something different than that, that is what you have to
remove.
Raka is totally pervasive, it embodies everything.
And raka is not the mind.
When you have that realization, you discover that every phenomenon has no basic ground than the r
aka itself.
And the unchanging dharmakaya, I'm sorry, unchanging bodhicata has never been deluded at all.
This undeluded bodhicata is pervasive to all the beings.
This call it essence call of enlightenment is the same call it as all the buddhas has. That's no
difference.
That the self-awareness light comes from that is pervaded to everywhere.
The pervasive light is pervading to everywhere.
Even though light and that call it is inherent to everyone, but it's naturally been hidden to them,
to everyone.
It is naturally hidden, naturally hidden.
And therefore, there is a kind of a hidden, like I called Mahayana Ghar, but then when you read
there is three or four, four, or two things.
But those can be summarized by the great master Ruhusumpa, and Ruhusumpa said there's like the
hidden, naturally hidden, and then hidden, two things.
So this is naturally hidden. There's nobody hidden, but it's naturally hidden that call it is.
This net is the realization, ultimate intention, the realization of all buddhas of three times.
When you, when whoever discovered this nature, that everyone, that those person or those
individuals equal to everyone and every this nature is never moved by any means to anywhere.
It's all the time. Say, whether you got the realization as a Buddha or whether you really got the
realization as seven beings, nature is the same, exactly the same.
As those others said, in these Dapnathas.
Therefore, this ordinal yuma, the natural, self-evident scalded, it is free from every focal point,
yet it is never changed, never moved from the ordinal nature.
The express energy, energy, power from that call it, the spontaneous inherent power call it, is
reflecting to everywhere, as is reflecting, it is also experienced by everyone.
What do you see? We are experiencing, that is what you see. It's self-reflective and who is
experiencing? The one who is reflecting, we are experiencing that.
And this, this whatever self-reflective experience by one's own self, and this all the clear lumin
osity, signs and call it, what we all is, is appearing through means of the sculptures or their
arisingness.
When that effort, when effort that perfectly at that time, then self-born awareness, lamp, or light
of the self-born awareness, will capture the all, the object, and then subject by self-born
awareness, the luminosity, and then the partition of the duality is totally collapsing or removed.
What is, you begin to experience, or what, not experience, what is, you begin to perceive and sing
is then the display, any environment of the self-born awareness of the light.
And that is known as then Togal practice too. Togal practice is that. The way that experience comes
from, is then come from, from where that arising is then, is arising as said so many times.
It is nyumma-sriva, or nyummasi, the original nature of the mind, the source of every, that display
, which comes, that. And that is what the Togal, and then many of you already received the Togal
practices and the teachings generally.